And we'll begin. We're hearing from the Aviation and Marine Engineers
Association Incorporated. This is the first hearing of our day on
Subcommittee A on the Employment Leave Bill. So we have 10 minutes with you.
That includes time for questions.
It's over to you how much time you give for that, and we look forward to
hearing from you. Time is yours now.
Thank you.
Right. I'll start off.
We've seen that we don't have our two Richards at the moment, so hopefully they'll
join us soon. So just a bit of background.
So, as you know, we're the Aviation and Marine Engineers.
My name's Jackie Roberts. I'm the national secretary, and I've held that position
for 20 years. It's an elected role.
And, so basically we were formed in
1881, and we came out as a branch of the
Australian Institute of Marine and Power Engineers, so have been going
for quite some time. And we represent skilled workers, mainly
in aviation, dairy, meat, marine, local
authorities, and port industries.
So we're not affiliated to any political party,
but we are affiliated to the NZ CTU.
So as a union, we negotiate almost 50 collective agreements,
and at the moment we've got 4,300 members.
Over half of our members work for Air New Zealand.
Basically, we represent all members there apart from pilots, and we have
almost 800 members at Fonterra. So those are our largest
employers that we work with. And I'm going to hand over to
Rachel now. She wrote the submissions and then coordinated member
feedback. So she sent out our
submissions to all members, and they provided feedback on that.
And then hopefully, we will have our two Richards
joining us online. We've got two. One is a delegate, Richard
May, and the other one, Richard Belwar, is a member.
And they both work for Air New Zealand as licensed aviation maintenance
engineers, or LAMEs, as we call them.
And to become a LAME, you need a four to five-year traineeship,
and then to work on aircraft, you pass rating courses specific to those
aircraft, and so they need to sign the aircraft out before you fly on them.
So as well as pilots who have a license, our engineers also have
licenses. So they specifically want to talk about how their
pay and their leave would be affected by this bill.
Sorry to interrupt, Jackie, just to let you know that I believe at least one of
your Richards needs to be accepting the request to become a panelist
so that he can appear on the screen.
So Richard, if you can hear us, if you accept the request to become a panelist,
you'll be able to join in.
Okay.
Thank you. Rachel, off you go.
Yes. So thank you for taking the time to listening to us
today.
So as you can hear, I have a strong French accent, so if you need me
to repeat at any time, let me know.
So as you can see
in our submissions, we have a few points that
we raised, and I would like to emphasize
a few of them. So the first point that
I would like to emphasize is that the transitional
provisions are very concerning
for the employment agreements that we have in place,
because
the transitional provisions are written in a way
that if one year after
commencement of the new act an employment agreement still
contain terms that conflict with the new act,
the intention is that the minimum statutory entitlements will
automatically override any inconsistent contractual
provisions.
This override will apply to all such term, including those
as they're currently more generous than the new
minimums.
And, I understand that
the purpose
of this approach is clearly to reduce
unemployment entitlements
and undermine unions in their negotiations of
enhanced provisions in collective agreements.
So it creates an unwelcome precedent
on a longstanding principle
that an employment agreement including more generous
provisions than the minimum legal entitlement applies.
And,
we believe that unions will absolutely litigate this
issue vigorously.
In addition, we would like to emphasize the second point that
is already in our written submissions,
which is the inconsistency of this bill with the
international obligation.
In particular, the points that we raised regarding to
the override of more generous dispositions in
collective agreements by this
bill if it was becoming a part of the
legislation. We believe that this would
potentially jeopardize the New Zealand European
Union Free Trade Agreement, the FTA,
since it would breach the minimum standards required
in this agreement.
By weakening New Zealand's employment
relation framework, this bill actually
risks triggering a formal response from the European
Union because once notified,
they could initiate dispute settlement proceedings
and even terminate the FTA, and the economic
consequences of such termination would be
significant and I guess devastating
for
the current economy.
Given the European Union stated that it will resort to
sanctions if key labor commitments are not met,
the risk of FTA termination is, in our view,
substantialAs the bill does not meet this
labor commitment, it should be
withdrawn to avoid breaching these international
obligations and facing challenges before
international bodies.
I think I saw a hand up somewhere with that.
Yeah. We do typically wait till the end for questions, so if you've finished with
your presentation, we're happy to take questions.
Yeah. I've finished before Richard and Richard take over, if they manage to
connect.
Well, if they're still trying, I do believe that the secretariat are trying to
communicate with them to get them to accept the panelist request.
But in the meantime, Dan, if you wanted to ask your question, then that makes
sense.
Yeah, sure. Thank you, Chair, and equally happy to ask this at the end
once everyone's had their say. But I suppose at this juncture,
in my mind, annual leave exists so people can properly
rest and be safe at work. And in safety-critical
industries like aviation and maritime, fatigue just doesn't
affect workers, it actually affects the wider public.
So in your view, does this bill increase fatigue risk
in commercial aviation, and could the bill make flying
less safe for customers?
Absolutely. It's
totally correct and, yeah, thank you for raising it because we
are very worried for the health and safety of our
members, obviously, but also the wider public.
And also, as Richard and Richard are trying
to explain when they will be able to connect, actually this
would make
the New Zealand industry less palatable for high-skill
workers like
aviation workers to stay in New Zealand after
training for many, many years to
become engineers. They will certainly decide to
go overseas with all the training that they would have
accumulated here, because the conditions would not be
good enough for them to stay. Yeah.
And I'll just put in that part of Richard Valois' submission, if he gets on,
is the fact that it won't be attractive to actually take leave
because it will be worth less for him to take the leave.
So
that's his view. But anyway, hopefully they can get on.
The other Richard, Richard May, they can't find where to tick
the join button with the join as a panelist, so I'm not
quite sure what's happening there. Could be an Air New Zealand thing.
In the meantime, we've got a question from Pamjit Parmar, so we'll just keep moving
forward. And
can I just say, we are coming to the end of the time, so we'll take Pamjit's
question. Perhaps if they wanted to put anything that they would have
said verbally that's separate to your written submission in writing, and they
can send it through to the committee to make sure their point has been made, we're
happy to accept that.
Thank you.
And I'll go to Pamjit Parmar.
Yeah, thank you. Thank you for your submission.
Just keen to understand your process.
You mentioned that you reached out to your members, and then based on the feedback,
you have prepared the submission. So how does that process work?
Do you come up with what you have presented and circulate to your members to
seek their views, or was it like a blank kind of
invitation where basically people could provide their feedback?
Because I'm imagining that not every member would have given exactly the same
feedback, so how do you make sure that it is representative
of your members? Is it like the majority?
How do you kind of summarize everything that comes through?
Yeah, so basically, it all started with some members
very motivated to follow what's going on
in the legislation, and so they actually
contacted us almost two months ago, for some of them
who are still trying to connect, and who were very
keen to know
what the union would be doing for them to
make sure that
we make some submissions on their behalf.
And so they contacted us with some
issues that they already highlighted in
what they saw in some drafts circulating around.
So that was the first
way we
got some feedback, actually, from members
directly
concerned by these issues and contacting us.
And secondly,
close to the time, and we didn't have too long, as you know,
to
put submissions together. I think it was not even four weeks.
So two weeks after the beginning of the time period,
we had to
open to make submissions.
We contacted members, and especially our delegates,
to circulate our first draft around and see
if there was anything they would like to add, especially in
terms of specific details to their
situation in terms of leave calculation, et cetera,
with some members mentioning that they would be
losing
a lot of their leave entitlements and pay.
I don't know if Jackie would like to add to this as well.
Unfortunately, we've reached the end of our time with you.
We must move on to our next submitter.
But we really appreciate your perspective and your submission, both written and
verbal. Thank you. And as I said, the extension of the offer to have Richard and
Richard put their thoughts in writing to send it through to the
committee, absolutely fine. And thank you very much.
Thank you.
Okay, we'll move on now to the Tertiary Institute Allied Staff Association.
Oh. The camera won't come on. Oh, there we are.
Oh, we heard you.
The camera's not showing it.
Here we go. Wonderful. Welcome. Unfortunately, sorry, I don't have your
names in my agenda, but I see that Shelley
is one of you, so welcome. We have 10 minutes with you.
Feel free to introduce yourselves, and that includes time for questions.
So we look forward to hearing from you. Thank you.
Kia ora, Madam Chair. I think the reason our names aren't there, I was
unwell when we were supposed to present, and we've been kindly given this
additional opportunity, so thank you for that. I'm Shelley Weir.
I'm the National President of TEESA, and with me is Sonia
Swale, who recently joined us as an employment relations
advisor. Sonia wrote our submission.
I've added a little bit to it, but it is primarily her work.
Both of us come from the sector in that we have been,
until very recently, employees
of longstanding. My position is elected, Sonia is now a paid
employee of TEESA. So we have a lot of experience and knowledge of
what goes on within the sector, and that is why
we wanted to be able to speak briefly to our submission.
We know that you've heard from many others,
in terms of why they oppose the bill, and we heard part of a very
erudite presentation from our predecessor, and some of
those points are captured in our submission as well.
But what we want to do is just focus on one main area, and
that's what the impact will be for people who work less than full time.
I need to say, while it's in our submission, perhaps just repeat, we
cover a very wide range of occupational groups, from
senior managers through to people who work as cleaners
or ground staff, as waged workers, and anywhere in
between. And many of our members stand to be impacted
adversely if the bill goes through.
As you know, we are asking that it be completely withdrawn.
We do not believe government intends to punish workers
through reducing their leave, whether it's sick leave or annual leave,
or create confusion for employers and workers alike.
But those, we genuinely believe, are the consequences if the bill
goes through as planned. A very large number of our members
are women, about 75%
of...
Oh, sorry, I got distracted by something that popped up on the screen.
About 75% of our members are women, and a
large number of them do not work full-time because they've got
childcare obligations, and they, in particular, stand to lose
significant amounts of leave, annual leave, and of
course, the sick leave changes impact everybody.
We have a lot of pressure in our sector already on people's
workloads. Our sector has been through enormous
disruption in the years leading up to the creation of Te
Pūkenga, the creation of Te Pūkenga, the
transition to NZIST, as it now is, and its
disestablishment. And both Sonia and myself have been, and
are, heavily involved right through those processes.
The result has been many staff leaving the sector through
redundancies, but also through disenchantment and burnout.
So those that are left carry very high workloads indeed, and
it's very easy to dismiss the allied staff, who
cover a wide range of different occupations, as back office
staff, which they absolutely detest being labeled in that
way because it trivializes them and does not acknowledge the
very wide range of tasks they actually perform.
The concern there is from our members is that this bill, if it
goes through, means they'll have even less opportunity for
rest and recreation. The bill does not discuss that.
It's really focused on financializing and payment
instead of leave. And the risk that there is for our
members, if this goes through, is that already overloaded
workloads will mean that more of them either burn out or get
disenchanted and leave altogether.
So there's a skills gap that will be increasing across the
sector from this legislation. The sick leave
provisions also, I have to say, it's difficult
for us to believe that government really wants to do this.
We think that there hasn't been enough thought put into the bill,
because it's extremely punitive.
Our members interact with members of the public every day,
with students who bring in all sorts of illnesses.
I'm sure the committee members have been, or maybe students, you know
what students are like. They bring everything with them.
So they bring in whatever they might have caught and share it widely and
generously with the staff, so it's passed on.
Members of the public come into our workplaces on a regular
basis. The risk of the spread of anything contagious in
particular, or even just ordinary illness like the normal flu,
is going to be exacerbated if people are not able to take
reasonable amounts of sick leave.
And that will be the consequence of the sick leave provisions being
watered down to simply an hours basis instead of the
time-based basis that they are on, that people will not be able to
take their sick leave. They will come to work because they no longer
have paid sick leave when they shouldn't.
They already do that because they're very committed and
conscientious employees, and it's hard to stop our colleagues, and I
guess ourselves as well sometimes, in doing that.
But this will make it very much worse with obvious impacts
for health sector costs, for the health
system, and general wellbeing. I'm going to stop,
I think, because we know that the committee may want to ask some
questions. But before I just do that, Sonia
put a lot of work into our submission on top of what's a pretty heavy
workload. Is there anything in particular that you would like to add?
I think in particular, the concern for our members
is,
or the risk to our members is, the monetization, I suppose,
of leave.
Mm.
Historically,
many allied staff are not on a particularly high
pay
wage bracket. And so,
the monetization
element, uh-
Gives them increased money for casual hours.
We have quite a large number of staff who are on casual
type hours, so they're more likely to go, that's their base,
whatever their income, and have that rather than
the
supported
sick leave entitlements.
So yes, whilst they're getting extra pay rather than getting necessarily sick
leave,
they should be squirreling away that money to
help them have time off. But the reality is, unless
you have a sick leave entitlement, you're very
rarely going to take that when, particularly when we consider
our cost of living,
what we're working through with that. And so it is a concern.
It does, particularly in terms of our
female workforce, who are often, again, as Shelly's indicated,
part-time. There are impacts with that with annual leave
requirements and things as well. We, again, to reiterate
what Shelly has said, TEASA feels that this bill
should be withdrawn and sent for some reworking.
Thanks, Sonia.
Sorry, we have probably time for one very quick question.
And I think I'll go to Jan, given Dan's already had a question, if that's okay.
Jan Tinetti.
Kia ora, thank you, and thank you, Shelly and Sonia.
Quickly, this bill seems to target
what a mainstream work looks like, and you've said that your
workforce doesn't fit into that mainstream.
Do you feel that in the risk of this bill trying to come up with a
simple solution, that it's missing out a whole lot of the workforce,
including many of your workforce?
Absolutely. And we've got many
examples. I can think of one of my former colleagues who is
part-time,
so is proportional of 0.5. But for the last 10 years has
been given what
will be the equivalent of another 0.2 of a role, but that's been done as a
casual
basis, so many hours ongoing. So the benefit for that person
is very under the proposed bill, is really lacking and is a
concern.
And perhaps I can just add for our members who do work full-time on salaries,
many of them have arrangements that are in our collective agreements to give
them time in lieu for additional hours that they work.
That won't be counted
in how the leave will be calculated.
Right. Well, thank you. I found that really interesting.
Thank you very much for that.
Kia ora. Thank you.
Thank you both for making yourselves available and being part of this process with
us. We do appreciate it.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank you, committee members.
Kia ora.
All right.
We'll now move on to our next submitter. We have Dani McLean.
Dani, great. We see you online. That's the first hurdle crossed.
Dani, we have five minutes with you.
That includes time for questions. We'll hand it over to you now.
Thank you very much.
Tena koutou katoa. First of all, thank you for allowing me the
opportunity this morning to dive a little deeper in some of
the elements of my written submission.
So I'm speaking today from my lived experience.
This bill really caught my eye as a tau iwi health worker,
as a disabled person. I live with persistent pain as well as an
incurable autoimmune disease.
I also have plenty of experience across my career working as a
casual, a part-time, and a full-time worker, including periods
of time where I was working regularly above my contracted hours in
order to meet service minimums. I've touched on a number of
points in my written submission, but I wanted to focus on
three here today. The first is that, as
previous speakers have stated, money is not the same as protected leave.
So this bill would propose that workers would receive, even with the cash
entitlements, less value than what they currently receive
from annual and sick leave, if it were paid out based on current
rates. But my primary concern is that this
bill would create more issues around the power dynamics to do
with taking leave. So protected sick leave
ensures that there are processes around workers who are
unwell and needing to take time off work.
Cash in hand, however, would require the use of discretion from
employers in order to decide whether or not time off was
appropriate. Previous speakers have highlighted that in a cost of living
crisis, it's unrealistic that workers are squirreling money
away that they receive as cash in hand.
And I just think that it's unrealistic.
If you put yourself in the scenario of a vulnerable worker, especially a disabled
worker,
who's concerned about perceptions of their capability and
competency to do the job, putting up their hand and saying, "Hey, I need time
off," and expecting their employer to not make judgment based on that.
Also importantly,
supportive return to leave processes are enabled by protected paid sick
leave, and they are what allow workers to make full recoveries and return
to their full working potential. So if we're thinking about the health of the
workforce as well as the health of services, protected leave is a buffer that
we would be losing as part of this bill.
The second point is based on lived experience I've had of being on ACC
compensation, which is my concern that the loss of sick
leave and annual leave for those who are on ACC
compensation doesn't make sense to me.
I had a five-month long return to work
period recovering from a serious back injury, and during that period of time,
recovery was essentially my full-time job.I was slowly
reintroducing work, but when I wasn't doing that, I was doing
domestic tasks that took me significantly longer and required
breaks. I was going to appointments, I
was liaising with both my employer and my care
providers, and I was doing a significant amount of rehabilitation, up to 30 hours
a week. So this was not rest. It did
not mean that I had less sick leave need when I returned to the workforce, and it
certainly didn't mean that I had had a holiday.
I don't think ACC compensation is a substitute for sick leave, and
importantly, the first five days you have off when you're injured, you
are required to take sick leave. You can't just jump straight into ACC
compensation. So people returning from ACC comp have already taken a
big knock to their sick leave balance, sick leave that they'll
need on their return, because ACC comp does not protect the common
cold, does not protect against the flu.
My final point I wanted to focus on is that
as somebody who has a medical need for time off work from time to time,
I'm really aware that Aotearoa has significant inequities based on
mechanism of illness and injury.
I've seen both ACC and the medical system firsthand, and I can
tell you that if you have an injury, your ability to return to
work is a much more supportive process than if you have an illness.
A good example of this is when I experienced
COVID, I had a significant long COVID reaction, which meant that
my return to work looked a lot more like concussion recovery than
it did an illness recovery, and yet my experience of that was I needed
my sick leave protections, all of them, in order to return to work safely.
Somebody who had a head knock, for example, playing sport, they would have
ACC to help support them back into the workforce.
So my concern is that we already have these inequities for workers who are
ill versus being injured, and that a leave provision,
a bill like this would deepen those inequities, and I don't think that that's the
intention of the bill. I'm happy to receive any
questions.
Thanks very much, Dani. We have time for one quick question. We go to Jan.
Kia ora, thank you, and thanks, Dani. You made a really good point.
If you've got a disability, you might be on so many hours, and such as a
disability that you have, you might not be able to work.
You might have a contracted set of hours, but you might be able to work more hours
if you've got that flexibility.
In this particular case, would that mean then that you wouldn't be
getting the amount of sick leave for, annual leave, sorry, for
the hours that you've worked over a year because you've only
employed for that amount of time as someone with a
disability?
Yeah, correct. So,
it is oftentimes a really delicate dance, especially in pre-employment, that
disabled people have to do where you take a bit of a gamble about,
I want to work everything I'm contracted to do, so do I negotiate lower
contracted hours in the knowledge that I might need time
off work?
The financial calculation will do your head in.
And I think that it's really unfair that people who are already
burdened by working lower contracted hours who can stretch up to
a higher capacity, it meets the business needs and it also meets the employer's
need, would essentially be financially punished for doing that.
And I think importantly,
it needs to be said that structural ableism is part
of what locks disabled employees out from full-time work.
The expectation and oftentimes the narrative for disabled workers when
they can't work to full time is that the value they present is less than.
Evidence doesn't support that. As a health worker, my lived experience makes me
better, not worse at my job.
Thank you.
Thanks very much.
Thank you very much, Dani. Really appreciate your submission and your participation
in this process, and thanks for-
Kia ora
... making yourself available to us this morning.
We'll move on now to our next submitter.
Next we have Simon O'Neill. Simon, we have five minutes with
you. That includes time for questions.
I'll just see if you can turn your camera on, and then we'll hand over to you now.
Simon, are you with us?
You can-
There we go. We've got the audio.
Got sound. Have you got camera? No camera.
Not yet, but we'll deal with sound if that's all we can get. Oh, here we go.
Wonderful.
Oh, there we go.
Simon, welcome.
Yeah. Appreciate it.
We've got five minutes, including time for questions.
So if you do want to question, just allow for that in your time. Go for it.
Okay. I've only got a few little points really.
Most of my points, of course, are in my recommendations in my submission,
but the things I... First one, I think sick leave in this country is
just...
We really need to, I think, take a step back and look at how we do it, especially
now that rightly or wrongly, we're moving to more of perhaps a gig economy,
where people instead of having one fixed job for maybe a period of time where they
have the one job their whole sort of working life, now
people are having maybe two or three jobs.
It gives them options on lifestyle.
I've just come from that. I'm working full-time now, but I spent four years holding
down four part-time sort of casual jobs. And that was by choice.
That wasn't circumstance. But they each go-- I was working in hospitals, I was
working in tourism, I was doing a bit of driving,
I was doing a bit of emergency response as well.
So that was really good because it just, it was almost like having your hobby jobs.
But it does mean the way the act is sort of written here, when people are going
sort of from job to job, perhaps within a certain sector, your sick leave is always
resetting. And that's one thing, both having
been an employee and an employer in that sort of situation,
I think we need to have minimum sick leave for everyone.
And maybe the way we do that is by stepping back and looking at the whole
model, is establishing maybe a minimum 5 days or 10 days of
sick leave as a pulse. So regardless of where you go, if you're working, you've
still got those sick leave. So you can accrue it in your first job, and you might
never use it for the next 10 years, but it travels with you.
Because the last thing I want is bringing in a new casual staff
memberEspecially in winter with coughs, colds, flus, COVID, RSV,
all that sort of stuff floating around,
is I don't want them feeling they have to come into work because they, A, they feel
that they've got an obligation, but they also feel like they've got no other option
but to come into work because they just haven't got enough sick leave,
even under this new model, to take some time off.
Because there's the sick leave, I think as the previous speaker sort of touched on
it as well, there's the sick leave for being sick, but then there's that also
if you haven't had an accident, so you're covered by ACC,
then there's the aspect of sick leave for recovering.
Just because you're no longer cough, cold, spluttering, doesn't necessarily mean we
want you or you should be back in the workforce yet.
So that's my first point, I think. I think
we need to start looking at a better model for sick leave.
I
think leave is leave. Leave is there for a reason.
It's part of the working package, and it's there to make sure that,
if you want to look at the whole exploit the worker thing, it keeps your worker
resource in a better state. Having mandated leave, you have to
go and have a break.
And a lot of employers have you have to have every year of your 20
days, a minimum 10-day block where you just get right out of the
workplace and just chill and refresh.
That actually makes you a better resource as a worker.
That's a bit capitalist cynical, but
I think it's good for the employee as well.
So I'm very much against any option where you can
just, because of economic factors, you can just sell
off some of your leave.
It's
one of those things. One of my staff has just done this, and yeah, straight
away, four grand in the bank, really happy, gone on bill straight
away. But he's got
two small kids. He needs to have some leave just to-- He gets worn out.
If you've got small kids, you know what it's like.
It's like a full-time job times 10.
So that being able to sell off some of his leave that he's accrued helps with
paying the bills, but now he's back at work,
and the
opportunity to refresh and recharge just isn't there.
And I just totally agree with what the previous speaker said about
ACC. ACC is one thing and sick leave is
another, and I don't think you can say, "Oh, you're on ACC, so we're already
helping you out. We don't need to do any more."
I think, once again, looking at workers as a resource, and that's
not on
probably more of the left side of the spectrum, but I think it's a good way of
looking. If you want to protect that resource, we've really got to...
It's like if it's a piece of machinery, you do all your wofts and coasts and
everything else on that.
And a lot of that's mandated. I think we've got to look at our staff the same way
and actually make sure we're not just working really hard to get them back into the
workforce before they're actually ready.
Because whether it's an injury or an illness, often that just
makes it worse and worse, and they actually become more of a burden to themselves,
the employer, and the health system as well.
So those are basically my three points. Thank you.
Thank you. We've got time for a quick question from Panji Pama.
Hi.
Thank you, Simon, for your submission. Yeah.
So you have submitted saying that there should be some minimum
sick leave, and what kind of hours are you thinking that the minimum sick leave
should apply? And the second question is about if somebody's working
only a very few hours, then they could be accumulating sick
leave that in a realistic manner they don't need that kind of
sick leave. So what's your response to that?
The first, I
think five days seems to be the minimum, for want of a better word, standard
that we've had in play for a long time.
So just off the bat, I'd say five days, but I think this is the
whole idea of-
For how many hours five days are you saying?
How many hours per week if somebody is working?
Five working days. Working days are different for different employers.
So for me, I work 12-hour shifts. But each day is
qualified as
10.5 hours. So I think just keep it generic rather than go
down to a number of hours because that differs from workplace, sort of model to
model. But that's the whole point of going back and let's have a look at this whole
thing from scratch and determining that based on sort of maybe some more science.
What was the second part of your question? Sorry.
Second was, if somebody's working just very few hours, then
they might build up more leave than they actually
need in an actual sense. So how do you deal with that?
I think the need is once again relative.
If you're employing that person because you need their resource, as a resource, you
need their skills.
It's not a one for one. I work one hour, so I get one hour sick leave or whatever
the calculation is. I can't remember.
I think we still need a minimum because regardless,
if you take a day off because you've got a cold,
but you haven't got enough sick leave because you only doing casual, I think, yeah,
that's where that minimum comes in.
And I think that minimum should, as I said, carry on between you from
job to job. So every time you change jobs, you're not doing a reset back down to
zero because that encourages people back into the workplace when they shouldn't be
there. But-
Thank you, Simon. Sorry, I'm going to have to interrupt.
That's good. Thank you.
You've gone over time now.
Yeah.
And so we need to move on to our next submitter.
But really appreciate your perspective on this and your participation in the
process. Thank you.
Thanks, Katie. Thank you very much.
All right, we'll move on now to Kiwi Boss Limited.
We have Julia Shallcross,
or Shallcross. Hopefully, I've got that right. Julia, welcome.
We have 10 minutes with you this morning, that includes time for questions, so
do consider that if you are wishing that time, and we'll pass over to you
now.
We can't hear you, Julia. So it does look like your
microphone's on, but it doesn't appear that
your audio is connected.
Hopefully, a quick fix. Otherwise, what we could do is...
OhNo, unfortunately that has
not worked.
What we could do, Julia, is we'll go to our next submitter, who's
hopefully ready, and then we can come back to you, give you a bit of time to check
your audio. Is that okay?
Yes. Are you able to hear-
Oh, we've got you.
Okay. Thank you.
Brilliant. Go for gold. We've got 10 minutes. It's over to you.
Perfect. Thank you so much, Madam Chair and members of the committee, for the
opportunity to appear on behalf of Kiwi Boss today.
I am an employment lawyer, and
over the last 10 years of running Kiwi Boss, I've spoken
to hundreds of HR professionals, business owners,
managers, payroll practitioners about the Holidays Act.
I've trained them, I've listened to their challenges, and I am taking
a few of their points that I've heard over
training sessions
to this
opportunity today to speak with you.
So Kiwi Boss supports the intent of the bill
and has made just a few
recommended amendments. So today I'm going to be focusing
on three main areas: bereavement leave, casual
employment, and leave compensation payments.
And I'd like to begin with bereavement leave under Clause
89 of the bill.
Every New Zealand employee should have the opportunity to
honor the life of someone they love.
But while grief is universal, the way it's practiced
differs amongst different cultures.
Yet the bill, as it currently stands, limits that
to close family members, which we'll look at soon, and the amount of
time that people have to grieve. And these provisions, as they
currently stand, closely mirror current Holidays Act
legislation.
So today, Kiwi Boss is submitting that the Employment Leave Bill
is amended to reflect the cultural diversity of New
Zealand.
Three days bereavement leave for close family, or one
day for others, is not enough time, not for
someone to grieve someone that they love, not enough time to
arrange funerals and all of the administration that goes with
losing a spouse, for example, and not enough time to attend
a tangihanga or to travel overseas for a funeral.
Bereavement is a significant life event, and the law should
reflect the cultural diversity within New Zealand.
We talk in employment law about the importance of tikanga
Māori, so we should incorporate that
within the Employment Leave Bill by increasing the length
of time so that people can attend a tangihanga.
New Zealand's a diverse country. Just recently in the "New Zealand Herald,"
it's been published that 35% of
people who are the ages
of 25 to 65,
35% of those people were born overseas.
So we are culturally diverse.
People may wish to go overseas in order to attend funerals.
So in practice, the current approach is creating
uncertainty for employers. So it's very much on behalf of
employers that I'm speaking today, but they are left with these difficult
discretionary decisions, and we don't want them to have to attend
employment lawyers to get a handle on what to do in these
matters. It can lead to inconsistent outcomes,
disadvantage, and potentially discrimination.
So we've already recognized cultural diversity in terms of other areas of the
Holidays Act, like the transfer of public holidays.
Bereavement leave should also be updated to
align with that multicultural approach.
Kiwi Boss recommends increasing bereavement leave from the three
days to five days where there
is a close family relationship,
or where the employee has to take significant
responsibility for all or any of the arrangements for the
ceremonies, or administration relating to the
deceased person, which is a new ground that I've
added,
or cultural obligations for any of those
three.
It is submitted that there be a minimum of one day in any other
circumstances relating to the closeness
of the association between the employee and the employer,
and that this would provide greater clarity and consistency
for both employees and employers.
Closely linked to this is the definition of a close family member.
In practice, this definition is too narrow for
modern families and for the cultural diversity that New
Zealand now has. It doesn't reflect
modern structures like stepfamilies or how
different cultures perceive close family connections.
It's not in step with tikanga Māori concepts of
whānau and wider family connections.
Often, the person who's passed away is the person who raised that
particular employee, but they may not be the mother,
father, or the very limited definition that we currently
have as a close family member.
This only creates uncertainty for both employees and
employers, and again, employers are forced to make
discretionary decisions, which can lead to other
employees feeling disadvantaged.
So this can lead to inconsistent outcomes, and we
recommend adopting the task force definition of a close
family member, including
stepfamilySibling in-laws,
extended family, such as aunts, uncles, nieces and
nephews, and culturally recognized relationships like
whāngai.
In some circumstances, it could be extended to a
close friend.
I am happy to take any questions at this point, or to continue with the
last two submissions.
Yeah. Please continue. We do typically take questions at the end if there are any,
and don't take it as a lack of interest if there aren't.
You're usually giving us a very concise and helpful submission, so keep going.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
We will now turn to casual employment under Clause 8.
The current definition would benefit from greater clarity.
In practice, many casual arrangements evolve
from casual into regular and predictable working arrangements,
but without any formal change to status.
This can create uncertainty for both employers and employees,
and increase the risk of dispute.
Employees are required to continually reassess status and
update agreements.
The bill relies heavily on correctly identifying
casual employment for the purposes of the leave
compensation payment.
If an employee is treated as casual, but is in reality working
regular hours, they could be incorrectly treated under the leave
compensation
regime, and instead of accruing their leave
entitlements. There's also a related issue which arises
under additional hours under Clause 7.
While standard hours are defined, in practice, additional
hours can become regular and predictable over time.
It is not always clear at what point those hours should be treated
as standard hours rather than continuing to attract leave
compensation payments.
In practice, this could lead to misclassification,
underpayment, backdated leave entitlements, and
disputes.
We recommend clearer statutory guidance on what
constitutes genuine casual employment, including
when a working pattern is no longer casual.
Clear requirements relating to casual employment should be required
in employment agreements, along with practical guidance for
employers on when those casual arrangements are converting
to standard hours.
Further guidance is also needed on the distinction between standard
hours and additional hours, particularly where additional
hours have become regular.
And then finally, I would like to address leave compensation payments under
Clause 129.
The proposed increase to 12.5%
represents a significant rise in labor costs for
employers who rely on casual or variable hour
workforces. Many of these employees currently receive
around 8% holiday pay on a pay-as-you-go basis,
and often they're not actually eligible for sick leave.
This change is going to disproportionately affect some
sectors within New Zealand, including
hospitality, retail, logistics,
agriculture, and small construction,
industries that are already operating under significant cost
pressures and relying heavily on workforce flexibility.
We recom-
Julie, I have to stop you there.
Sure.
We've reached the end of our time.
That's fine.
But thank you. It has been an incredibly helpful submission, very technical
and appreciated. And as it looks, no questions, but not for a
lack of interest, as I said.
So really do appreciate it, and of course, for your written submission as well.
Thank you.
Thank you. Thank you. Bruce, I see we have you online. Wonderful.
Ready to go. We have five minutes, sorry, 10 minutes by the looks of
it. Sorry, we did agree to that. 10 minutes with you this morning, and that
includes time for questions, and look forward to your,
I understand it, very technical submission.
So hopefully we get your sound going and your camera,
and then we'll hand over to you.
Right.
There we go.
Welcome, Bruce.
Oops.
It's all right. Gotcha.
Okay.
Go for it.
Good morning.
Yes. Thank you for having me.
My submission is systems based, as I've
tried to outline.
My background is as a chartered accountant for numerous
decades,
with my systems involvement, computer
systems involvement, started in the very early days of commercial
computing.
The purpose of
the system I developed for a small
construction business
was that the system, the payroll system, be fair,
transparent, easily understood.
And I've found in looking at payslips over the
years for various family members and others, that
they
don't meet those sort of standards.
I've called what I've developed the EHAP system,
Easy Hourly Accrual Payroll, and so I'm
fully on board with hours based and accruing from day
one.
And the essential part in accruing from day one
is the
dropping of anniversary dates, and that, in my view,
has been a real constraint in the current system.
So thank goodness that's being dropped.Another point I made
was about
the pay rate being what I call prevailing pay
rate instead of averaging.
But I do have concerns about
the system talking about the lowest pay rate, and I'll come back to that.
The concern I have is that I don't think
what I put forward as the key ratio for accruals
has been properly understood
and properly modeled. And so the key ratio,
and if you can think about it in this way,
four weeks holiday,
wide standard,
52-week year. That means that the
non-holidays
are 48 weeks. And so the correct
accrual ratio for accuracy is 4
upon 48
or 1 upon 12,
not 4 upon 52.
And that's a really critical issue
that must be addressed, because otherwise it doesn't work.
Now, the key point about having that ratio of 1 to 12
or 4 to 48 is the
system doesn't get into accruing further holidays
on holiday pay because it's already been done.
That's what the various tables I've shown you
in my submission
are about. It's a one-time accrual.
It's accurate at each payday and
that's really important.
So it's accurate at each payday on a continual basis,
and that should be the accrual. And I
think that
without that, you don't get the sort of
accuracy that employees need and
employers must have. And so,
the
huge deficit that the government has had in the health and
education sector,
it comes from being unable to
reconcile the payroll system properly, and
this overcomes it. I
hope you have read and seen the
addendum that I provided because of the problem with an Excel
spreadsheet being
unable to be uploaded.
I outlined what happened over
five years for the first employee we used this for,
and it's highly, highly accurate.
So,
a couple of points there about the ratio.
In appendix two, I show an email thread with
MB from early April where it is patently wrong
what has happened,
because there's a lack of understanding about
the old or the current 4 in 52 or
0.0769 ratio, where people are
seriously disadvantaged if they leave. Not okay.
And yes, I've talked about the addendum.
I just will cover the
current ratio and why it might have been in place
for so many years. So the Holidays Act comes from
2003,
and our computer
systems and the power of computers was a bit lower in
2003. We didn't have even smartphones or any of
that sort of stuff,
and so there was that element. But
also,
back at that time,
the thinking was that
employers were granted or given
leave after the completion of a year,
i.e., at an anniversary date. And even
today, some payroll systems, they keep
allocating the
leave on the anniversary date. That's complete
rubbish in my view,
because I believe you should accrue from the very first
day.
And so the ratio, the
0.0769 ratio is nonsense.
It arises from the 4 out of 52.
And
so as soon as that is ditched,
we can make serious progress.
The modeling I've done in Excel, what I've given
you is a copy of what I've used. It's been highly
accurate. But
after my initial submission in
October '24, I did
some additional modeling of complex scenarios,
and I offered that to MB. It was never
accepted.
I'm happy to
offer it to the committee or to anyone that wants to have a look,
because I did that modeling to prove
that complex scenarios could be easily
handled and accurately handled. And when I say
complex, I'm talking about whatever complexity you want,
be it
overtime, be it shift allowances, be it penal rates,
or even as happens inIn
local government,
where a person has two or three different jobs
with different pay rates
on a continual basis, where they work 10 hours at one, 20 at
another, and 15 at another, or whatever.
And
so it can handle that and handle it absolutely
accurately in terms of
the hours, or as I prefer to call it, the units,
and
the dollars. So that's very important.
So I'm happy to handle
that. The final point I'd make is about
the benefits of having the right accrual
system, and I talk
about
financial, not just the employee and direct
payroll, but the financial accountability
and the productivity. And
look,
having had a background in accounting and as a chief financial officer,
and that sort of thing, being able to reconcile things properly is
critically important. And when I made my first submission
back in October '24, I didn't even realize
that the government liability exceeded $2
billion.
I was sort of
taken aback, actually. I didn't realize it was that
bad. So
finally, the work I've done has been peer reviewed by competent
people. I'm happy for it to be further peer reviewed,
but it's a deeply, deeply serious issue.
Thank you so much, Bruce. An incredibly technical
submission, as we expected, and really appreciate it.
And I know that the officials will appreciate your work as well.
So thank you for providing it for us in writing.
And we'll move on to our next submitter.
But thank you for everything you've done up until this point to allow you to give
us this information. So have a good day.
Okay, thanks.
All right. We'll move on now to our next submitter. We have Natalia Maamea.
Welcome, Natalia. We have five minutes with you this morning.
That includes time for questions.
And thank you very much for being part of this process.
Go for it.
Cool. Morena. Tēnei te mihi kia koutou e te committee.
Thank you for this opportunity. Ko Natalia Maamea tēnei.
Nō te Moananui a Kiwa me Aotearoa ahau.
I'm a payroll consultant. I've been working in this industry, leading payroll teams
for over 25 years in some of our country's largest and most complex
organizations. For the past 14 months, I've been operating
independently, running my own consulting business, helping organizations
meet their compliance obligations, and prepare for legislative change, just like
this one. I'll take my submission as read, and I wanted to use this time to speak
into some of the non-technical realities, because I'm sure you've heard many great
technical submissions already. Overall, I support the
original intent of this bill. However, I don't support the material
impacts that this bill will have to some employees.
The move toward a simpler, more standardized system is both necessary and
long overdue. We know that the current Holidays Act framework is complex.
It's difficult to interpret and even more challenging to implement, particularly
for employees with variable hours, and there are heaps of non-standard workers
out there. I also want to acknowledge the responsibility that this committee
holds. The outcome of this bill will directly impact a wide
range of people, and while those impacts might not be experienced equally by
everyone, your role in shaping the reform is
significant. I encourage you to openly consider the perspectives
from those who will be most directly affected and whose day-to-day
realities will determine whether this reform succeeds or not.
When this reform was announced in September last year, the objective was clear,
to create a system that is simpler, more consistent, and provides certainty
for both employers and employees.
It was positioned as a system that would work better for everyone.
So I thought, "Cool, let's see what the draft legislation says." And what I'm
seeing now through submissions and discussion is a bit of a shift.
There's increasing acknowledgment that while the system might be simpler, some
employees may be financially worse off.
That creates a fundamental tension, a reckoning of good faith,
and does that sit right with us?
If the system is simpler, but the outcomes are not perceived as fair,
then what I know will happen is we'll end up with challenge,
pushback, and ultimately we'll see exceptions to these simpler rules
introduced.
And once exceptions are introduced, complexity will return.
So the question for me and for this committee becomes,
does this bill actually solve the original problem, or does it risk
replacing one form of complexity with another?
We must strike a balance. We cannot move too far in favor of one group or another.
We know that.
And we cannot leave the payroll teams in a position where they become the cleanup
function because that balance hasn't been achieved.
Because when we don't have alignment with legislation, employment
agreements, and real work patterns, complexity doesn't disappear.
It just gets pushed into payroll.
I also want to flag that fringe cases like variable hours
and overtime and commission, from my experience, are real common
work patterns, not fringe. So it's worth this committee
taking a real critical look and making all efforts to recommend there be
a solution, like perhaps calibrating the leave compensation payment as an
example. I mentioned that businesses and unions need
to get workforce and financial modeling done, like pronto,
to understand what employees earn today, what they'll earn under the new framework,
and what differences are going to pop up.
If that's not done, then businesses won't know the impacts to their
peopleAnd then they'll be scrambling to explain what's going on,
unsure if things are right or not, and that won't provide certainty, which goes
against the objective of the bill.
I am pleased that there is a two-year implementation window because this won't be a
simple transition.
There'll be contract negotiations, system reconfiguration, and
potentially managing dual systems for a period of time.
This will need capability. It'll need guidance and coordination on a
mass scale. I'm really keen to understand what that
guidance and support looks like from the working group, because if we want
consistency, the next phase of the implementation needs to be
organized really, really well, and it needs to start now.
And critically, it must include the right people.
Payroll professionals who have been in the trenches, people representing our
workers, unions, employers, system providers, legal,
HR, and change experts all need to be at the table because each
person sees a different part of the system.
If it becomes an echo chamber of voices not dealing with operational reality,
it won't work. Simple as that.
So just to close, this reform is a major opportunity,
but its success will depend on whether we achieve true simplicity, not just in
rules, but in process and in outcomes.
Because if the solution to complexity is a system where employees are
expected to absorb disadvantage and payroll teams have to juggle
exceptions to the norm, then complexity will come back.
And at that point, we haven't solved the problem, we've just moved it.
Kia ora koutou. I'm afraid I used all my time up, but any questions, I'm happy to
take them.
That's not a problem, Natalia. Can I just say thank you for your submission and
thanks for the angle that you've taken. It's really helpful.
Not always an issue when we don't get a chance for questions, especially when we've
had a really clear and concise submission.
So appreciate your involvement, and we'll move on now to our next submitter.
Have a good day.
Okay.
And we now have Jennifer Haraki.
Jennifer, welcome. Look at that. You're ready to go.
We have five minutes with you this morning.
That includes time for questions if we can,
but that's okay, and we'll leave it to you now.
Kia ora, Madam Chair, committee members.
My name is Jennifer Haraki. I am a senior lecturer in
carpentry, and I'm speaking to the impacts of the Employment Leave Bill on
vocational education, particularly apprentices, tutors, and industry
supervisors engaged in physical demanding work.
I won't restate my written submission.
Instead, I want to focus on the core issue it raises.
Vocational education does not operate on stable office-based
patterns. It relies on block courses, self-driven delivery,
seasonal demands, overtime, and intense training periods.
These are not expectations, they are structural features of how
vocational education works. The Employment Leave Bill,
however, is built around standard hours, regular working
weekly patterns, retrospective averaging, and hour-by-hour
accrual of leave. That model is best suited to
predictable office-based work, not physically demanding
vocational settings. Under this bill, the hours that cause the
greatest fatigue, additionally irregular and intensive hours
frequently do not generate protective leave.
Instead, they generate cash. Recovery time is no longer
guaranteed. It becomes something workers are expected to fund
themselves. In reality, tutors are already
carrying irregular hours and excessive workloads under the banner
of flexibility while having less access to protected
rest and recovery than other workers.
This bill risks entrenching that imbalance rather than
correcting it. There is also an important taxation issue.
Leave composition payments are taxable income.
When protected leave is replaced with cash, workers do not
receive an equivalent benefit. They lose guaranteed
recovery time and receive a reduced tax substitute
instead, income that is absorbed into everyday living
costs and cannot function as genuine rest.
In physically demanding training environments, rest is not a benefit.
It is a health and safety safeguard.
When recovery time is replaced with tax cash payments,
fatigue is reframed as individual responsibility rather
than an organizational one. This affects
apprentices learning to work safely, tutors delivering
intensive training and pastoral support, and industry
supervisors balancing production with assessment.
Over time, it affects completion rates, workforce
sustainability, and the quality of vocational education
itself. So my policy question to the committee is:
how does the Employment Leave Bill ensure that apprentices, tutors,
and industry supervisors engaged in intensive,
physically demanding vocational training and industry
can access general rest and recovery
rather than being compensated only in tax cash for
additional hours worked? If the bill cannot answer that clearly,
then does not meet the needs--
sorry, then it does not meet the needs of the vocational sector.
For those reasons, I do not support this bill, and I submit that
Holidays Act 2003 should be retained as a more appropriate and
protective framework. In short, cash is taxed,
rest is not, and cash cannot replace recovery in
physically demanding work.
Thank you for your time.
Thank you, Jennifer. Can I just say that is a really, really constructive
submission.
You've addressed some of the concerns with the kind of casual side of things really
well, and just want to acknowledge that.
And can be reflected by the fact that we have no questions.
It's not a lack of interest. It means that we have no questions to ask you because
you've made it really clear, so really appreciate it.
Have a great day. Thank you for being-
Thank you. Bye
... part of the process.
All right, we move on now to Stand Up NZCTU
Youth Union Movement. I think we've got Xavier Walsh.
Oh, look at that, ready to go. You've done this before, Xavier. Welcome back.
Yeah.
We have 10 minutes with you this morning, that includes time for questions.
Over to you.
Tēnā koutou katoa. Ko Hiraka, Ireland me Britani te whakapapa rangai,
he karererangi hei Te Kaainga i,
he perihitini tahi o United Union.
He kamupū, he tauira o Waipapataumata Rau.
E whakaoti ana taku tuinga whakawhai mō nga kaimahi, Te
Tiriti o Waitangi me tikanga Māori.
Ko Xavier Walsh toku ingoa. So kia ora, my name is Xavier.
I have Sri Lankan and Pākehā whakapapa, and I'm
the co-president of Unite Union, co-convener of Stand Up,
and a PhD student,
looking at weaving tikanga Māori into personal grievance processes.
So a lot of my life revolves around the world of work.
You have my submission, so I won't repeat it line by line, but I really do want to
speak to the core message.
But before I do that, I would really like to tautoko those last two submissions
from Natalia and Jennifer. I thought they were really fantastic, and they really
spoke to the real issues and the real lived
experiences of those who will suffer as a result of this bill.
So the core message that I want to give is that this bill, the
Employment Leave Bill, is not reform.
It's a deliberate weakening of workers' rights.
Young workers particularly will be expected to bear the brunt of this
decision. What this bill will do, it will
cut leave, it will cut pay, and it will cut security.
It will move to an hours-based accrual system, which, as you've just heard,
does not work for everyone, particularly with people with
irregular work patterns. Even moving towards an
extra loading for casual workers of 12.5% is not
appropriate and will leave people worse off, particularly as these are
quite variable contracts. And
as Jennifer so aptly stated, rest
cannot be compensated for with more money.
Rest is very important, and it's integral.
You're actively attempting to create a system where those with less stability will
then get less rest, and that's deeply unfair, and it goes against the
very intention and the very foundation of the reason why we had
leave to begin with.
Two, I just want to say that,
again, the bill knowingly lowers leave.
It removes the greater of test and relevant daily pay, which
will worsen outcomes. The example was given of
commission. If someone earns commission, say they're earning
minimum wage, and they earn commission on top of that, they will then go
on leave at just their minimum wage rate, which
disincentivizes them from taking leave in the first place.
We know that if you don't take leave, there are massive issues to physical
health and safety, but also mental health and safety, psychosocial risk.
People burn out, people leave their jobs, and people are not productive
members of our economy. Again, there's a link
directly here to the Health and Safety at Work Amendment Bill too,
another awful piece of legislation, which I spoke to you the other week.
This bill, while purporting to be less
complex and simpler, is actually way more complex.
It's 50 pages longer than the current
Holidays Act, and it's got more formulas.
We've
had an issue of, as I'm sure you're aware, Unite
Union was a real whistleblower over nearly a decade ago
now, just over a decade ago, regarding that
workers were losing out on leave balances that they were entitled to.
And it really wasn't a tricky situation, yet we had all these lawyers and all of
these accountants who just simply couldn't do the math.
I started calculating average daily pay and relevant daily pay at the age of
17, and I interpreted the legislation and got it correct
time and time again. It's really not that difficult, I must admit
that. But I think that to
go through a system rather than actually supporting people is deeply
inappropriate.
If people need support, the way to do that isn't to lower your
expectations of them. It's to provide them with said support.
The really concerning issue of mine is that this bill will accelerate
casualization, and it removes the cost of doing so.
Casuals will lose their sick leave balances, and it will be zeroed on
commencement of this bill. Increasing loading, again,
is not compensation. It is just
precarity. You are giving a discount to precarity.
You're giving a discount to making people's lives worse.
And you're removing the cost of getting it wrong.
Young workers are already over-represented
in positions where they're already casualized or already working multiple
jobs, and you're going to make it worse off.
Yeah. You
punish multiple job holders, and
I think for me, that's really concerning of me.
My former national secretary, John Crocker, now the
legal advocate for the Council of Trade Unions, worked very hard on a
tripartite process during the last Labor government, where Business New Zealand,
the Council of Trade Unions, and government worked together to try to figure out
this issue. We knew that there were problems, and yet all of the findings from that
work have not been considered in the least through this process.
And so why start something and why go through all of that
rigmarole in order to just create a worse system that didn't consult with
anybody? I don't think I was ever asked about the Health and Safety Amendment.
I don't think I was ever asked about the Employment Leave Bill.
Instead, I've been presented with something that just simply is
unworkableAnd it doesn't work for anyone.
Young workers have stories, they have voices.
They already have some organizations, not as much as other groups.
But where were we at the table? Where were we when these
decisions were being made? Just being here at select committee is not good
enough. That is not democracy. That is not good law-making process,
and you should be put on notice for that.
You just cannot legislate for the future of work if you actively
ignore the future of workers and the future workforce.
This is a calculated weakening of our rights and
will not work. And
take it from me, I will definitely ensure that everybody
hears about how awful this bill will be.
Thanks, Xavier. We've got a
question from Jan Tinetti.
Kia ora, Jan.
Kia ora, Xavier. Lovely to see you, and thank you for your passion and
your submission.
In your submission, you've made a really clear case
around how vulnerable young workers are in this
particular bill, and it was a
comment that I wanted to ask a question of Natalia about, but ran out of time.
This bill is focused basically at
what's termed mainstream, and it's the people that sit on the
fringes. And it seems to me, you've identified
that young people very much sit in that fringe area, and you
talk about accelerated casualization in your submission.
One of the things that I'm trying to get to the bottom of here is the
incentivization for an employer
to actually follow through on that casualization more
and more, because of what's happened in this bill.
Could you comment on that, please?
Well, I think, there are many pressures that make
casualization
a seemingly good idea, particularly in times of
economic downturn, as we're currently experiencing.
But the reality is it doesn't create stability, and nor does it
necessarily enable the economy to succeed and
flourish. And we've seen it particularly, even
Australia has introduced
automatic rights. If you work for 12 months and you show a
pattern, you then can become a permanent
employee.
And the thinking for that is very clear.
If people will start gaming the system, people have gamed the
system. It's a real problem among casual employees that they're not told of
their rights about sick leave to begin with, and the solution to
not giving them sick leave isn't to increase their loading.
It's to actually ensure that these standards are being met, and that
the 10 days of sick leave that they're currently entitled to are being
able to be used for their intended purpose.
When you start looking at the so-called fringes, the margins,
it's bad law-making to think about
workers being 9:00 to 5:00, Monday to Friday, because most people don't
actually work that way at all. We're seeing increasingly, whether it be
mothers and fathers, young people, old people, ethnic
communities, migrant communities, Māori, Pasifika,
that people just need to do work differently. Work is evolving.
In the age of AI, work has changed massively just overnight, and yet
people are engaging very differently with that work.
And so it needs to be said that why would you create a bill for most
people when actually it's going to harm the people around the margins?
So why not go the other way? Why not try to encapsulate
everyone and make sure it works for the whole rather than trying to focus on the
many?
Thanks, Xavier. Appreciate that.
Thank you, Jan.
Thanks, Xavier, again for being part of the process and your written
and verbal submission. Really appreciate your perspective.
And we'll move on now to our next submitter. Have a great day, Xavier.
Kia ora.
Next we have
Murimu Bui. Hopefully, I've pronounced that correctly.
Murimu, we've got five minutes with you this morning.
That does include time for questions, and so we'll leave that to you now.
Good morning. Thank you, committee, for the opportunity to make an oral submission.
I hope you can hear me okay.
I appreciate it's Monday morning, so please bear with me.
I'm Murimu, and I want to be really clear from the outset
that I believe all labor is skilled labor.
At a basic level, I believe all workers deserve a
livable income and paid leave entitlements that meet real needs,
whether that's sick leave, parental bereavement, domestic
violence, and annual leave.
And I'm here today because the minister is fixated
on loosening the entitlements that workers rely on and have worked
very hard
to achieve.
I want to walk you through
how changes, as I see them in this bill, are going to
cause really far-reaching harm, particularly economically.
And the main reason for that is because we know that people are starting work
younger, and we know that they are staying workers for longer,
and in that environment, when workers become sick or infected, whether
that's acutely or chronically,
providing adequate paid sick leave is the
economically sustainable thing to do.
People will recover quicker, they will return to work healthier, and
they'll avoid spreading that illness to colleagues, customers,
their family, and whanau members.
And I wanted to focus on sick leave for my submission because access to sick leave,
particularly for part-time and casual workers, as many of us
are, improves the health of our communities. We know this.
This is what the data tells us. And if we're serious about
a sustainable economy for our children and grandchildren,
we also have to be honest about how many of
the infectious diseases that have been circulating in our community, like COVID,
are spread and caught through the air.I used to think that I'd know when
I was infected, that I'd feel it, so I'd know when to stay home, when to
mask up, when to test. I was wrong.
I learned that COVID particles can hang in the air for hours, even in
a so-called empty room. I learned that most of the time,
transmission occurs without symptoms, through inhaling
infected air.
And perhaps most significantly, I learned that the risk of long
COVID increases with each reinfection,
and that this is a disease that can affect every organ,
including the cardiovascular, immune, and nervous systems.
It's a disease that can cause
silent cell damage and organ damage that then
predisposes people to
conditions and diseases such as cancer, heart attacks,
organ dysfunction, as I mentioned.
In short, repeated COVID infections make us sicker and sicker until we die
an early and painful death.
And this is the environment in which most of us have had COVID at least once.
Almost 200,000 New Zealanders are living with long COVID now, and
according to the experts, this is just the best current
estimate, but it's probably an undercount
because
that risk of developing long COVID increases with each reinfection.
But we're not powerless. We can choose to reduce infection with measures we
know work, like ventilation, HEPA filtration,
wearing well-fitted respirator masks.
We can reduce disability and protect productivity.
One of the most basic and effective measures is promoting a culture of staying home
when sick. But we know
many people can't. An article from last year reported that nurses have
been reluctant to test for COVID and to take time off work because they
worried about running out of sick leave.
And this was in the midst of a wave of COVID-19.
That's the reality on the ground. Leave entitlements shape
behavior. If sick leave is inadequate, people will work
while they're sick, not because they don't care or they're irresponsible, because
they can't afford not to work.
An article from this year stated that about a third of New Zealanders have savings
less than $500,
which, by the way, is much less than most average New Zealanders pay for
rent in a week.
The approach that I believe is most consistent with public health, and thus
economic sustainability, is to ensure that workers aren't at work when they're
unwell, they aren't infecting other people and compounding the illness and
strain across our communities and our healthcare system.
This bill, on the other hand, would reduce what workers are paid when they take
leave, discouraging people from taking the sick leave at
all,
even when they should.
I agree with the people who've pointed out that women workers are going to
suffer disproportionately because of this policy,
tend to take more sick leave because of childcare responsibilities.
And I've also noted that the data and previous submitters
have also told us that young workers are also more likely
to be working in part-time or casual work, and more likely to
be facing environmental risks such as cold and damp housing, which we know
compounds illness. Young workers will also be disproportionately harmed by
these changes. My opinion, this bill is unnecessary.
It'll make our workplaces sicker, our communities less well, and our
economy less resilient. I urge you to
abandon it.
Thank you.
Thank you very much, Veemu. You've met the time perfectly.
So we will move on now to our final submitter, but really appreciate your
perspective and your participation in the process.
We'll move on to Milan Lewis.
Milan, wonderful. We've got you there. You can turn your camera on.
Lovely. We've got you. Sound perfect. Gotcha. Five minutes with you.
That includes time for questions. We'll leave it to you now.
Fantastic. Good morning, everyone.
Today, I'm going to focus primarily on the commission
side of the proposed legislation,
in that if you are earning a commission, as Xavier pointed out,
and you were to go and take leave, it does not account for your
commission in any of those payments there.
I feel that there is a contradiction with regards to the Health and
Safety at Work Act 2015. It places a
duty on the PCBUs to manage risks to work health,
including those psychosocial risks, and one of the
primary ways for a business owner
to manage that risk is to allow staff to take annual leave,
and to keep on top of that and make sure that staff aren't accruing too much
annual leave as well. However, if you are a
commissioned worker and you are now disincentivized from taking that leave,
you simply will not take leave if you can no longer afford to.
Xavier mentioned the example of somebody making
commission on top of a minimum wage, and
if somebody is earning a reasonable commission, has a certain
lifestyle, potentially has a mortgage or something like that, they
cannot afford to take leave. They wouldn't be able to pay their mortgage.
They may not even be able to pay rent on those weeks, and so they simply will
not take leave. That is creating a massive risk to those
workers and to the organization. Other than that, I believe that there
is some hypocrisy. We've had some legislation change on
February the 21st of this year,
including a cap on the amount of
earnings an employee can make before they're no longer allowed to raise a personal
grievance for unjustified dismissal or unfair dismissal.
We place that cap at $200,000 per annum, but that
is for total earnings, which means that there is already precedent
set by the legislation that has been acceptedThat total
earnings should be taking commission into account.
If we do not include this for annual leave payments, then
instead that means that we are disadvantaging those commission workers on both
ends there.
Then third,
under that proposed change, with leave payments being calculated on that base
hourly rate or just the base salary only, it creates
a direct incentive for business owners to set up
a system where employees are on a low base rate.
They might even make it enticing by offering a very high
commission component,
but knowing that that means that staff will not take that annual leave
there. I definitely don't think that that is something that we should
be looking for for staff here in New Zealand.
Thank you, Milan. Really appreciate that. We've got a question from Jane Tileti.
Please.
Thanks. Thanks, Milan, and thanks for your submission.
I think
if I summed it up,
we're really facing a changing world of work, and commission's always been
there, but it also relates to the complexity of work.
Do you think that what's happened here is that we're trying to make something so
simple that we're missing out on what work is
becoming, and it's becoming very different?
I do. I do think that. I think that
obviously the intent of the bill is to try and make things as simple as possible
for PCBUs, and I can understand the intent
to simplify things by way of that. I just think that by
doing so, it's created a lot of, or it will create a lot of
downstream effects that haven't really been considered enough by the
bill. And I guess I fall back to the
previous legislation change where there's the
$200,000 limit,
in that anyone that had disagreements with that,
it says that there is a 12-month period where if you're an
existing employee, it can't be used against you
because you're expected to be able to go and negotiate with your employer to
change your contract.
That's just not the way the world works.
That's not the way that employees and employers have that relationship.
And I think if we're trying to expect that same defense with the new
legislation, it's just not going to happen.
Employees just don't have that amount of power in the workplace.
Thank you.
Appreciate it. Thank you, Milan, for being part of this process and for your
perspective on the submission.
Cheers.
Really appreciate it.
Okay. Committee, we're going to go off public
session. We'll have a short break, and we'll come back as a full committee in
the private link that you should have been sent at 10:50.